नीतस्सुग्रीवमैत्रीं तदनु हनुमता दुन्दुभे: कायमुच्चै:
क्षिप्त्वाङ्गुष्ठेन भूयो लुलुविथ युगपत् पत्रिणा सप्त सालान् ।
हत्वा सुग्रीवघातोद्यतमतुलबलं बालिनं व्याजवृत्त्या
वर्षावेलामनैषीर्विरहतरलितस्त्वं मतङ्गाश्रमान्ते ॥१॥
नीत:-सुग्रीव-मैत्रीं	having taken alliance with Sugreeva
तत्-अनु हनुमता	after that by Hanumaan
दुन्दुभे: कायम्-	the corpse of Asura Dundubhi
उच्चै: क्षिप्त्वा-अङ्गुष्ठेन	having flung far away with Thy toe
भूय: लुलुविथ युगपत्	then (Thou) cut asunder
पत्रिणा सप्त सालान्	by a single arrow seven Saala trees
हत्वा सुग्रीव-घात-उद्यतम्-	killed (the) eager to kill Sugreeva
अतुल-बलं बालिनं	Baali who had incomparable strength
व्याजवृत्या	by using a strategy
वर्षा-वेलाम्-अनैषी:-	(Thou) spent the rainy season
विरह-तरलित:-त्वं	tormented by the pangs of separation (from Seeta)
मतङ्ग-आश्रम-अन्ते	near the Aashram of sage Matanga
Having taken alliance with Sugreeva which was brought about by Hanumaan, Thou flung far away the corpse of the Asura Dundubhi with Thy toe and also cut through seven Saala trees by a single arrow simultaneously, to demonstrate Thy strength to Sugreeva. Baali who was incomparable in strength and was eager to kill Sugreeva was killed by Thee by using a strategy. Thou then spent the rainy season tormented by the pangs of separation from Seetaa, near the hermitage of sage Matanga.
सुग्रीवेणानुजोक्त्या सभयमभियता व्यूहितां वाहिनीं ता-
मृक्षाणां वीक्ष्य दिक्षु द्रुतमथ दयितामार्गणायावनम्राम् ।
सन्देशं चाङ्गुलीयं पवनसुतकरे प्रादिशो मोदशाली
मार्गे मार्गे ममार्गे कपिभिरपि तदा त्वत्प्रिया सप्रयासै: ॥२॥
सुग्रीवेण-अनुज-उक्त्या	by Sugreeva, on Thy younger brother Lakshmanaa's admonitions
सभयम्-अभियता	in fear Thou were approached
व्यूहितां वाहिनीं ताम्-	and marshalled that army
ऋक्षाणां वीक्ष्य	of monkeys, seeing
दिक्षु द्रुतम्-अथ	in all directions quickly
दयिता-मार्गणाय-अवनम्राम्	to search for Thy wife, before Thee
संदेशं च-अङ्गुलीयं	a message and a signet ring
पवनसुत-करे प्रादिश:	in Hanumaan's hands gave
मोदशाली	Thou who were very delighted
मार्गे मार्गे ममार्गे	in all directions searched for
कपिभि:-अपि तदा	by the monkeys, even then
त्वत्-प्रिया सप्रयासै:	Thy consort, with full effort
When Thy younger brother Lakshmana admonished Sugreeva, he in fear approached Thee marshalling an army of monkeys, to search for Thy wife Seeta in all directions. Thou were delighted to see this and gave to Hanumaan who was standing before Thee, a message and a signet ring for Seetaa. The monkeys very diligently started on the mission to search for Thy consort Seeta.
त्वद्वार्ताकर्णनोद्यद्गरुदुरुजवसम्पातिसम्पातिवाक्य-
प्रोत्तीर्णार्णोधिरन्तर्नगरि जनकजां वीक्ष्य दत्वाङ्गुलीयम् ।
प्रक्षुद्योद्यानमक्षक्षपणचणरण: सोढबन्धो दशास्यं
दृष्ट्वा प्लुष्ट्वा च लङ्कां झटिति स हनुमान् मौलिरत्नं ददौ ते ॥३॥
त्वत्-वार्ता-आकर्णन्-	Thy accounts hearing
उद्यत्-गरुत्-उरु-जव-	having grown wings with great speed
सम्पाति-सम्पाति-वाक्य-	flies away (Sampaati), (and) by the words of that Sampaati
प्रोतीर्ण-अर्णोधि:-अन्तर्नगरि	(Hanumaan) jumped across the ocean in the city (of Lankaa)
जनकजां वीक्ष्य	seeing Seetaa
दत्वा-अङ्गुलीयम्	and giving the ring
प्रक्षुद्य-उद्यानम्-	destroying the garden
अक्ष-क्षपण-चण-रण:	and killing Aksha in the famous battle
सोढ-बन्ध:	put up with the bondage (of Brahmaastra)
दश-आस्यं दृष्ट्वा	and seeing the ten faced one (Raavana)
प्लुष्ट्वा च लङ्काम्	and burning down Lanka
झटिति स हनुमान्	quickly that Hanumaan
मौलिरत्नं ददौ ते	gave to Thee the crest jewel (given by Seetaa)
On hearing Thy account Sampaati had grown fresh wings and flew away. As Sampaati had told him the whereabouts of Seetaa, Hanumaan jumped across the ocean and reached the city of Lankaa. There he saw Seetaa and gave her the ring, destroyed the garden, killed Aksha kumaar in the famous battle, and put up with the Brahmaastra bondage. Then he met the ten faced Raavana and burned down Lankaa. Hanumaan then quickly went to Thee and gave Thee the crest jewel sent by Seetaa.
त्वं सुग्रीवाङ्गदादिप्रबलकपिचमूचक्रविक्रान्तभूमी-
चक्रोऽभिक्रम्य पारेजलधि निशिचरेन्द्रानुजाश्रीयमाण: ।
तत्प्रोक्तां शत्रुवार्तां रहसि निशमयन् प्रार्थनापार्थ्यरोष-
प्रास्ताग्नेयास्त्रतेजस्त्रसदुदधिगिरा लब्धवान् मध्यमार्गम् ॥४॥
त्वं सुग्रीव-अङ्गद-आदि-	Thou, Sugreeva, Angada and other
प्रबल-कपि-चमू-	warriors of the monkey army
चक्र-विक्रान्त-भूमी-	who conquered the earth
चक्र:-अभिक्रम्य	set out to cross
पारे-जलधि	to the other side of the ocean
निशिचरेन्द्र-अनुज-	by the younger brother of the Asura king
आश्रीयमाण:	who sought refuge in Thee
तत्-प्रोक्तां शत्रु-वार्तां	as told by him, the information of the enemy
रहसि निशमयन्	hearing in secret
प्रार्थना-आपार्थ्य-	(when) the requests were in vain
रोष-प्रास्त-आग्नेय-अस्त्र-	in anger Thou sent the fire missile
तेज:-त्रसत्-उदधि-गिरा	in fright of its power, by the words of the ocean
लब्धवान् मध्यमार्गं	Thou got a way through (the ocean)
Thou set out with a huge army of monkeys led by great warriors Sugreeva, Angad and others and conquering the whole earth reached the shore of the ocean. Raavana's younger brother Vibheeshana, crossed over to Thy side, and taking refuge in Thee, disclosed the secrets of the enemy which Thou heard in secret. When the requests made to the ocean deity were in vain, in anger Thou sent the fire missile to annihilate the waters of the ocean. Frightened by the power of the missile, as ordered by the ocean deity, Thou got a way through the ocean.
कीशैराशान्तरोपाहृतगिरिनिकरै: सेतुमाधाप्य यातो
यातून्यामर्द्य दंष्ट्रानखशिखरिशिलासालशस्त्रै: स्वसैन्यै: ।
व्याकुर्वन् सानुजस्त्वं समरभुवि परं विक्रमं शक्रजेत्रा
वेगान्नागास्त्रबद्ध: पतगपतिगरुन्मारुतैर्मोचितोऽभू: ॥५॥
कीशै:-आशान्तर-	by the monkeys from all the directions
उपाहृत-गिरिनिकरै:	brought groups of mountains
सेतुम्-आधाप्य	a bridge getting built
यात: यातूनि-आमर्द्य	went (to Lanka), destroyed the Raakshasas
दंष्ट्रा-नख-शिखरि-शिला-साल-शस्त्रै:	teeth, nails, mountains, rocks and trees having as weapons
स्वसैन्यै: व्याकुर्वन्	with Thy armies displaying
सानुज:-त्वं समर-भुवि	with Thy brother in the battle field
परं विक्रमं	terrific prowess
शक्रजेत्रा वेगात्-नागास्त्र-बद्ध:	by Indrajit soon tied down by Naagaastra
पतगपति-	by Garuda's
गरुत्-मारुतै:-	force of wind of his wings
मोचित:-अभू:	were (soon) released
The monkeys from all the quarters brought mountains and rocks by which Thou got a bridge built across Lanka.Crossing over Thy army of monkeys attacked the Raakshasas with teeth claws mountains rocks and palm trees as weapons. With Thy brother displaying terrific power in the battle field, Raavana's son Indrajit soon tied down Thy troops with Naagaastra. Garuda, Thy vehicle soon released them from that state by fanning them with his wings.
सौमित्रिस्त्वत्र शक्तिप्रहृतिगलदसुर्वातजानीतशैल-
घ्राणात् प्राणानुपेतो व्यकृणुत कुसृतिश्लाघिनं मेघनादम् ।
मायाक्षोभेषु वैभीषणवचनहृतस्तम्भन: कुम्भकर्णं
सम्प्राप्तं कम्पितोर्वीतलमखिलचमूभक्षिणं व्यक्षिणोस्त्वम् ॥६॥
सौमित्रि:-तु-अत्र	Lakshmana, there indeed
शक्ति-प्रहृति-	by the missile 'Shakti' being struck
गलत्-असु:-	was slipping off life
वातज-आनीत-	brought by Hanumaan
शैल-घ्राणात्	the mountain (on which the herb grew) by smelling
प्राणान्-उपेत: व्यकृणुत	got his life back and killed
कुसृति:-लाघिनं मेघनादम्	the master of magical arts - Indrajit
माया-क्षोभेषु	disturbed by the magical powers of Raavana
वैभीषण-वचन-हृत-स्तम्भन:	Thou were relieved from the stunning effect by Vibheeshana's words
कुम्भकर्णं सम्प्राप्तं	Kumbhakarna, who had come
कम्पित-उर्वीतलम्-	making the earth tremble
अखिल-चमू-भक्षिणं	eating the whole army
व्यक्षिणो:-त्वम्	Thou killed
The missile 'Shakti' sent by Raavana, struck Lakshmana who was slipping off life. He was revived by smelling the herb which grew on the mountain which was then brought by Hanumaan. After that Lakshmana killed the master of the magical arts Indrajit. Thou were disturbed by the magical powers of Raavana and were relieved from its stunning effects by Vibheeshana's words. Kumbhkarna who came to join the battle, made the earth tremble and was devouring the army of monkeys, was then killed by Thee.
गृह्णन् जम्भारिसंप्रेषितरथकवचौ रावणेनाभियुद्ध्यन्
ब्रह्मास्त्रेणास्य भिन्दन् गलततिमबलामग्निशुद्धां प्रगृह्णन् ।
देवश्रेणीवरोज्जीवितसमरमृतैरक्षतै: ऋक्षसङ्घै-
र्लङ्काभर्त्रा च साकं निजनगरमगा: सप्रिय: पुष्पकेण ॥७॥
गृह्णन्	accepting
जम्भारि-संप्रेषित-रथ-कवचौ	the chariot and armour sent by Indra
रावणेन-अभियुद्ध्यन्	fighting with Raavan
ब्रह्म-अस्त्रेण-	by the Brahmaastra
अस्य भिन्दन्-गलततिम्-	his row of heads cutting off
अबलाम्-अग्निशुद्धां प्रगृह्णन्	Seetaa purified by fire accepting
देव-श्रेणीवर-	by the Devas of high order
उज्जीवित-समर-मृतै:-	brought back to life who were killed in the battle
अक्षतै: ऋक्षसङ्घै:-	who did not have any wounds, the host of monkeys
लङ्का-भर्त्रा च साकं	and along with the king of Lanka (Vibheeshana)
निज-नगरम्-अगा:	to Thy own city returned
सप्रिय: पुष्पकेण	with Seetaa in the (chariot) Pushpaka
Accepting the chariot and the armour sent by Indra, Thou fought with Raavana and cut off his row of heads by the Brahmaastra, and accepted Seetaa after she was purified by fire. The Devas of high order healed and revived the host of monkeys who were wounded and killed in the battle. Then along with the king of Lanka, Vibheeshana, and Thy consort Seetaa, Thou returned to Thy own city of Ayodhyaa in the chariot Pushpaka.
प्रीतो दिव्याभिषेकैरयुतसमधिकान् वत्सरान् पर्यरंसी-
र्मैथिल्यां पापवाचा शिव! शिव! किल तां गर्भिणीमभ्यहासी: ।
शत्रुघ्नेनार्दयित्वा लवणनिशिचरं प्रार्दय: शूद्रपाशं
तावद्वाल्मीकिगेहे कृतवसतिरुपासूत सीता सुतौ ते ॥८॥
प्रीत: दिव्य-अभिषेकै:-	pleased with the coronation done with holy waters
अयुत-सम-अधिकान् वत्सरान्	for more than ten thousand years
पर्यरंसी	ruled happily
मैथिल्यां पाप-वाचा	(pertaining) to Seetaa, because of the slander
शिव! शिव! किल	what a pity, indeed
तां गर्भिणीम्-अभ्यहासी:	her, who was pregnant, abandoned
शत्रुघ्नेन-अर्दयित्वा	by Shatrughna was killed
लवण-निशिचरं	Lavanaasura
प्रार्दय: शूद्रपाशं	(then Thou) killed the shudra ascetic
तावत्-वाल्मीकि-गेहे	after that in Vaalmiki's Aashrama
कृतवसति:-उपासूत सीता	who was living, Seetaa gave birth to
सुतौ ते	Thy two sons
Thou were pleased to be coronated with the holy waters and ruled happily for more than ten thousand years. Reacting to a scandalous gossip about Seetaa, Thou abandoned her in spite of her being pregnant. O what a pity. The Asura Lavanaasura was killed by Shatrughna and Thou killed the shudra ascetic. Thereafter, Seetaa who was living in Vaalmiki's aashrama gave birth to Thy two sons.
वाल्मीकेस्त्वत्सुतोद्गापितमधुरकृतेराज्ञया यज्ञवाटे
सीतां त्वय्याप्तुकामे क्षितिमविशदसौ त्वं च कालार्थितोऽभू: ।
हेतो: सौमित्रिघाती स्वयमथ सरयूमग्ननिश्शेषभृत्यै:
साकं नाकं प्रयातो निजपदमगमो देव वैकुण्ठमाद्यम् ॥९॥
वाल्मीके:-	Vaalmeeki
त्वत्-सुत-उद्गापित-	then made Thy sons to sing
मधुर-कृते:-आज्ञया	the beautiful composition, by his order
यज्ञवाटे	in the premises of the Yagya
सीतां त्वयि-आप्तुकामे	Thou were desirous to take back Seetaa
क्षितिम्-अविशत्-असौ	she disappeared into the Earth
त्वं च काल-अर्थित:-अभू:	and Thou were requested by Kaala Yama
हेतो: सौमित्रि-घाती	for that reason Thou abandoned Lakshmana
स्वयम्-अथ सरयू-मग्न-	then Thou submerged in Saryu river
निश्शेष-भृत्यै: साकं	along with all the attendants
नाकं प्रयात:	going to Swarga
निज-पदम्-अगम:	reached Thy abode
देव वैकुण्ठम्-आद्यम्	O Lord! The eternal Vaikuntha
In the premises of the Yanjya by Vaalmeeki's order Thy sons sang the beautiful composition which was composed by him. Hearing it Raama was desirous of taking back Seetaa, but she disappeared into her mother Earth. At the request of the Kaala Yama to return to Thy abode Vaikunth, Thou first created reason to abandon Lakshmana and then Thou submerged in the river Saryu along with all Thy attendants. Then going to Swarga Thou reached Thy abode the eternal Vaikuntha.
सोऽयं मर्त्यावतारस्तव खलु नियतं मर्त्यशिक्षार्थमेवं
विश्लेषार्तिर्निरागस्त्यजनमपि भवेत् कामधर्मातिसक्त्या ।
नो चेत् स्वात्मानुभूते: क्व नु तव मनसो विक्रिया चक्रपाणे
स त्वं सत्त्वैकमूर्ते पवनपुरपते व्याधुनु व्याधितापान् ॥१०॥
स:-अयं मर्त्य-अवतार:-तव	that this human embodiment of Thine
खलु नियतं	indeed happened
मर्त्य-शिक्षा-अर्थम्-एवं	for mankind as a lesson only
विश्लेष-आर्ति:-	pangs of separation
निराग:-त्यजनम्-अपि	(and) also abandoning of the innocent
भवेत्	happen
काम-धर्म-अतिसक्त्या	due to extreme addiction to attachment and Dharma (duty)
नो चेत्	otherwise
स्व-आत्म-अनुभूते:	(for Thee) who are established in self consciousness
क्व नु तव मनस: विक्रिया	how come Thy weakness of mind
चक्रपाणे	O Wielder of the Discuss!
स त्वं सत्व-एक-मूर्ते	That Thou, the very embodiment of the Satvaguna
पवनपुरपते	The Lord of Guruvaayur
व्याधुनु व्याधि-तापान्	eradicate (my) sufferings from the disease
As a lesson to the mankind this human embodiment of Thee happened. Pangs of separation are caused by extreme attachment, as also extreme addiction to Dharma may lead to the abandoning of the innocent. Otherwise for Thee who are established in self consciousness how can such a weakness of mind be explained. O Wielder of the Discuss! Thou That very embodiment of the Satva guna! O The Lord of Guruvayur! eradicate my sufferings from the disease.